If you're reading this, that means my game actually ended up being something close to what I'd hoped it'd be.

I'm thankful to the support of everyone, both conceptually and spiritually, throughout the making of the game.

# POLYMIR: Development Retrospective

## Introduction

I first attempted to accomplish this with Minecraft. I created a number of different modpacks, totaling over 2,500 hours of playtime attempting to work through different solutions in order to achieve the functions necessary for my mental concept of what we now know as "polymir." Firstly, I needed users to be able to build ships with their own blocks. I needed immersive portals, as well as WebDisplays, so I utilized AI to port over WebDisplays (albeit quite poorly, it functioned in the most basic sense of showing a browser). It however became quite clear that because Minecraft stored air as a block, that it would not be possible to work as a base. Other mods just use simple block universes along a singular coordinate system.

## Part 1: Core Architecture Decisions

In order for our game concept to work, and really capture that "liminal space" feel while having all the functions to do the things I described and more, I break voxel bodies free of this base coordinate system by default. I decided on a system to be able to navigate this called "Layers", within which there would be a "full size voxel" as well as a micro voxel at 1/16th the size (such that 16x16x16 microblocks fit in a block), so that users can use configurations of those microblocks at scale. Layers use a recursive 1:16 scale ratio where each layer's microblock becomes the next layer's full-size block. This allows arbitrary detail through nesting - a planet can have smooth polygon surfaces at higher layers for distance rendering, or a microblock-sized door can anchor to a full workspace at a deeper layer. All layers use the same NBT format with JSON headers declaring their relative scale, maintaining consistent voxel logic across all resolutions. This means that later layers, at the 16 ratio, can be overlaid on top of layers so that the engine is technically scale invariant in units of 16, and clients can choose how much detail they would like to render, meaning everything is volumetric. Then, we can load layers that are "linked" via dimensional gates in parallel so that those portals work, and users can have any crazy combination of liminal space. Each layer can have its own physics parameters as well, which means you could have variant physics despite the space itself visually staying the same. Or, it could be that you have an impossible portal to infinite space in the middle of your room, with an intersection of the stars there. With dimensional gates tied to blocks in each dimension, you can link any impossible combination manually. Or, you could procedurally generate links to make an infinite Backrooms.

This was completely necessary in order to allow movement to be relative and days to be emergent based upon rotation of the body, and allows tiny items to be placed at full scale as a planet if you'd prefer a planet be shaped like one of those models. As a trade-off, there's no possibility of us storing air. We need to utilize the definition of gravity near a body to draw the atmosphere instead, more on that later. But, there were a lot of functions that needed to happen in order for us to be able to consistently generate voxel worlds. And there's a major problem - Voxels look absolutely terrible at range. A low poly model generally suits it better. So, this got me thinking.

What if instead of world data a la normal voxel game, that we instead begin with a 3D model painter and default planets, and instead allow users to design _beautiful_ distance models of systems? With portals being truly immersive and with extensive pocket dimension functionality built in, one would then be able to use an entire (semirealistic) solar system model as a _background_ for any other voxel space should they so choose.

But, this format has some unique problems as well. How do I actually figure out "who owns what", and how do I get around the "griefing" problem if planets can actually collide? Well, I figured I would just throw away the concept of inventory. People hate losing structures the most in games, and griefing is the most annoying to deal with. So, why not take the innovation from WorldEdit and generally store JSON-headed NBT files for literally each associated item/build, and create items as subdivided microblock configurations instead? This way items, structures, combinations of them, planets, and every other configuration, are not only stored in the same file format, but can be placed in a single shot and rotated according to the gravity direction. Then instead of doing everything based off of inventory, it's about unlocked voxel configurations, from which users can literally generate any model that they may not have access to the paid version of.

## Part 2: Spatial Systems

### Pocket Dimensions and Ship Permissions

Having pocket dimensions also solves the, "How do you do personal ship permissions while in space?" Simple, you make everyone manually associate their own pocket dimensions with specific block locations, and a valid "door" on a ship just has a set voxel portal size. So, the minimum size for a personal quarters is 2 blocks (since that's the minimum link you can travel through easily).

### Gravity and Atmosphere

In addition, if we're trying to actually be efficient, storing each air voxel is completely off the table. So I got to thinking: Isn't the atmosphere just drawn relative to the gravitational center anyway? So I figured we'd just use the biome content to determine the color of haze from the material palette for "day" vs "night", would blend those together, and gently fade them as you extend along the gravity radius. The atmosphere is densest when you're lowest (with slight translucency to allow for normal stars), but extremely thin as you near the boundary. This allows for you to visualize about where you'd need to slow your spaceship down as well so that you go into orbit rather than becoming captured, which I thought would be particularly intuitive.

Instead of doing true n-body physics, I figured we'd simplify utilizing the same math as the above. If we take a multiplier along time and say that, "If an object is within the surface traced by the gravity radius along the shape of the gravitational center for longer than [radius multiplier * time setting], then it is captured," it's much easier to technically accomplish and a lot more lightweight. So, I went with that option instead of extending gravity infinitely.

### 4D Traversal

Recall that all planets are stored in the same general format, and consider 2D animation with its "frames" designating how some 3D object moves in 2D space. We can extend this concept to 3D, utilizing entire planet-schematics and those live dimensional gates, such that we can simulate 4D traversal via 3D frame advancement. This also means we can use this system to animate microblock objects volumetrically.

Now that we're back on technical information, let's talk about how 4D frame advancement works in practice, as well as what the voxel multiverse actually is, and some additional features allowed by this particular odd system. Going through some "higher dimensional" space is some pretty complex math, but I was looking at some "higher dimensional" games as well as liminal space concepts, and most of them only used one or two "unusual" dimension views in order to stay intuitive to the viewer. Most 4D games are still visualizing 3D slices on a 2D screen for us to be able to perceive them and properly navigate through them. So then, why don't we do the exact same by having multiple 3D slices of these "4D" special planets and selectively and safely advancing the frame so that we don't suffocate the player in a wall? Though that would be hilarious, doesn't make for good travel.

## Part 3: Player Systems

### Player Types

There is importance in selection of your type. If you are a Neutral player, you are unable to join up with others on a mission. You may join a convoy for travel to save on fuel, but you are unable to join a faction, unable to purchase weapons, and unable to claim any system that is currently contested. However, Neutral players have a higher chance of obtaining Lore, smaller likelihood to appear on a scan, and have reduced losses upon ship destruction. Neutral players are also able to claim Neutral territory to run a Stargate connected to other nearby Gates as well as the Library. All travel via gates is cut significantly and expends significantly less fuel, so these are highly valuable. Passing to a neutral Gate means you also receive that Neutral player's map data.

Neutral territory may reflect weapons, but it is not immune to embargo. Users can effectively surround a stargate, and it is up to the players as to whether they trust the safety of a Neutral gate. Gates may benefit both the Neutral player as well as the Factions player, however, a Neutral player is not prevented from an unofficial partnership with a Factions player. To mitigate constant annoyance, all gates that you have travelled to will be able to send you "current # of ships" within a distance range. It's up to you to determine whether that risk is worth the exploration. Perhaps it's a bunch of neutral players with a bunch of unmanned ships. Or maybe it's a fleet. That risk is up to the player to determine what they take.

## Part 4: Combat and Economy

### Combat Mechanics

In addition, we disregard the concept of health radically. Instead of your "health" being necessary, or even tracked, there is simply voxel damage to ships, and loss of location data. The user themselves is never injured, and will always have access to schematics that they have created, regardless of the outcome of any battle. The loss is based off of valuable items, which will be differently constrained and tracked, and placed from a limited per-player inventory. There are matching aesthetic blocks for creative building, but these are not valued the same. (This creates incentives for people to create false gold ships in order to pretend that they either have excess money and therefore weaponry, or that it is all false and that they're worthless to go after.) A blessing to all players is that only a portion of the vault is taken upon ship destruction, or not at all if it is not destroyed in battle (rather, due to pilot error).

Combat mechanics are still a relatively hard one. I was thinking of having a limited range laser that could actually burn holes in your hull. Again, since it's just "ship damage" and users don't really have health, breaking the seal to space is of no consequence. It just looks ugly / is annoying, and they have to fix it manually rather than placing an entire new ship unless they want to destroy it (which would cause them to lose in combat). However, I wanted to create an incentive for carriers, so I was going to set a maximum ship volume but allow for ships to be docked within ships for a maximum fuel efficiency loss (that way you get some "free mass" boost, and Neutral players can be literal aircraft carriers/freight carriers).

I figure that fuel itself is simply a function of ore, and that users can turn the ore blocks that they can limitedly build with in a one-way conversion into fuel at different rates depending on the ore type. This doesn't work in reality with metals, but who cares. Games are meant to be fun.

### Information Warfare

In addition to this false gold bluffing mechanic, there is another type of planned information-based warfare: Starmap manipulation. There will be designated neutral zones, including one which users will be able to go to regardless of which "Stargate" they are accessing it from. This is a space where users can choose to upload information, or download information, about the map from a public database. Users are rewarded for returning Lore to the Library of Alexandria. Lore includes Map data, which can be shared maliciously, or altered maliciously. By "altering", factions may choose to deliberately obscure their location by selecting "hide base from Starmap" and upload a map showing their current location as blank space. This will not stop lone mappers entirely, but could make them less likely to discover your location and attack while you are away.

The importance of map data is this: You are only able to "autopilot" to systems that you have actually navigated to yourself, or that you have the map data for. Otherwise you are flying blind. Since users can upload conflicting or contradictory Lore, such as the Starmap, or a character history that is written differently, there may be multiple associated documents in the library. This also means that you may be falsely told about a system that does not exist in order to make a completely dark region appear populated. This could be strategy for someone to give up and leave a region where one wants to park a fleet. If your Lore is shown to disprove some confusion existing in the Library, the reward is multiplied. In addition, Lore about players is dropped upon ship destruction with a chance. Because location is entirely lost and all blocks can be respawned, their "claim" to this debris is destroyed when their map data is destroyed, leaving it as ruins to be collided with and for future players to encounter. Players who encounter this debris have a chance of acquiring the schematics that were lost.

### Economic Loops

I intend to reward people for "actually used" or popular builds, so I'll just track the number of times a unique build has been used in the overall server, of course pocket dimensions cannot be included if local, then the person who has the "blueprint" for this schematic is rewarded partial server currency for its popularity based off of a trust score and whatnot. Of course, this value is subject to change, which is why one must rely off of an account's trust score and latency and whatnot as well in order to calculate rewards. This will be reviewed in full in the proper section.

Trust score calculations are relatively arbitrary. We would be able to do this based off of a player history, login frequency, schematic creation and exploration frequency, etc. You can use any number of metrics in order to determine player "goodness." Someone will always game the system, make it so that it's functionally useless to do so without a botnet and that'll be fine, is what I figure.

## Conclusion

This is ... most of the feature list that I had planned, entirely written out for you to observe and critique. I was honestly afraid of judgement as well as afraid of someone executing on the idea better than me, so I gave myself from June until this month to keep building in silence. From now onward, I'll be putting changes to documentation and other things up on this site, so you'll be able to see where I'm at. 
I've used AI to generate a base [[Roadmap to Polymir]] so you can see where I'm at compared to the different features that I've actually built out in a more visually intuitive way.